1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2014 Nov;39(22):4442-7.

[Research of anti-aging mechanism of ginsenoside Rg1 on brain].

[Article in Chinese]

Li CP, Zhang MS, Liu J, Geng S, Li J, Zhu JH, Zhang YY, Jia YY, Wang L, Wang SH, 
Wang YP.

Neurodegenerative disease is common and frequently occurs in elderly patients.
Previous studies have shown that ginsenoside Rg1 was able to inhibit senescent of
brain, but the mechanism on the brain during the treatment remains elucidated. To
study the mechanism of ginsenoside Rg1 in the process of anti-aging of brain,
forty male SD rats were randomly divided into normal group, Rg1 normal group,
brain aging model group and Rg1 brain aging model group, each group with 10 rats 
(brain aging model group: subcutaneous injection of D-galactose (120 mg kg(-1)), 
qd for 42 consecutive days; Rg1 brain aging model group: while copying the same
test as that of brain aging model group, begin intraperitoneal injection of
ginsenosides Rg1 (20 mg x kg(-1)) qd for 27 d from 16 d. Rg1 normal group:
subcutaneous injection of the same amount of saline; begin intraperitoneal
injection of ginsenosides Rg1 (20 mg x kg(-1)) qd for 27 d from 16 d. Normal:
injected with an equal volume of saline within the same time. Perform the related
experiment on the second day after finishing copying the model or the completion 
of the first two days of drug injections). Learning and memory abilities were
measured by Morris water maze. The number of senescent cells was detected by
SA-beta-Gal staining while the level of IL-1 and IL-6 proinflammatory cytokines
in hippocampus were detected by ELISA. The activities of SOD, contents of GSH in 
hippo- campus were quantified by chromatometry. The change of telomerase
activities and telomerase length were performed by TRAP-PCR and southern blotting
assay, respectively. It is pointed that, in brain aging model group, the spatial 
learning and memory capacities were weaken, SA-beta-Gal positive granules
increased in section of brain tissue, the activity of antioxidant enzyme SOD and 
the contents of GSH decreased in hippocampus, the level of IL-1 and IL-6
increased in hippocampus, while the length of telomere and the activity of
telomerase decreased in hippocampus. Rats of Rg1 brain aging group had their
spatial learning and memory capacities enhanced, SA-beta-Gal positive granules in
section of brain tissue decreased, the activity of antioxidant enzyme SOD and the
contents of GSH increased in hippocampus, the level of IL-1 and IL-6 in
hippocampus decreased, the length contraction of telomere suppressed while the
change of telomerase activity increased in hippocampus. Compared with that of
normal group, the spatial learning and memory capacities were enhanced in Rg1
normal group, SA-beta-Gal positive granules in section of brain tissue decreased 
in Rg1 normal group, the level of IL-1 and IL-6 in hippocampus decreased in Rg1
normal group. The results indicated that improvement of antioxidant ability,
regulating the level of proinflammatory cytokines and regulation of telomerase
system may be the underlying anti-aging mechanism of Ginsenoside Rg1.

PMID: 25850282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Apr 30;232(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015.01.007.
Epub 2015 Jan 19.

PBMC telomerase activity, but not leukocyte telomere length, correlates with
hippocampal volume in major depression.

Wolkowitz OM(1), Mellon SH(2), Lindqvist D(3), Epel ES(4), Blackburn EH(5), Lin
J(5), Reus VI(4), Burke H(4), Rosser R(4), Mahan L(4), Mackin S(4), Yang T(4),
Weiner M(6), Mueller S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco (UCSF) School
of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: Owen.Wolkowitz@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of OBGYN and Reproductive Endocrinology, UCSF School of Medicine,
San Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Section for
Psychiatry, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (4)Department of Psychiatry,
University of California San Francisco (UCSF) School of Medicine, San Francisco, 
CA, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, UCSF School of Medicine,
San Francisco, CA, USA. (6)Department of Radiology, UCSF School of Medicine, San 
Francisco, CA, USA; San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

Accelerated cell aging, indexed in peripheral leukocytes by telomere shortness
and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by telomerase activity, has
been reported in several studies of major depressive disorder (MDD). However, the
relevance of these peripheral measures for brain indices that are presumably more
directly related to MDD pathophysiology is unknown. In this study, we explored
the relationship between PBMC telomerase activity and leukocyte telomere length
and magnetic resonance imaging-estimated hippocampal volume in un-medicated
depressed individuals and healthy controls. We predicted that, to the extent
peripheral and central telomerase activity are directly related, PBMC telomerase 
activity would be positively correlated with hippocampal volume, perhaps due to
hippocampal telomerase-associated neurogenesis, neuroprotection or neurotrophic
facilitation, and that this effect would be clearer in individuals with increased
PBMC telomerase activity, as previously reported in un-medicated MDD. We did not 
have specific hypotheses regarding the relationship between leukocyte telomere
length and hippocampal volume, due to conflicting reports in the published
literature. We found, in 25 un-medicated MDD subjects, that PBMC telomerase
activity was significantly positively correlated with hippocampal volume; this
relationship was not observed in 18 healthy controls. Leukocyte telomere length
was not significantly related to hippocampal volume in either group (19
unmedicated MDD subjects and 17 healthy controls). Although the nature of the
relationship between peripheral telomerase activity and telomere length and the
hippocampus is unclear, these preliminary data are consistent with the
possibility that PBMC telomerase activity indexes, and may provide a novel window
into, hippocampal neuroprotection and/or neurogenesis in MDD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4404215 [Available on 2016-04-30]
PMID: 25773002  [PubMed - in process]


3. Front Behav Neurosci. 2015 Feb 5;9:17. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00017. eCollection
2015.

Dietary intake alters behavioral recovery and gene expression profiles in the
brain of juvenile rats that have experienced a concussion.

Mychasiuk R(1), Hehar H(1), Ma I(1), Esser MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary Calgary, AB, Canada.

Concussion and mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) research has made minimal
progress diagnosing who will suffer from lingering symptomology or generating
effective treatment strategies. Research demonstrates that dietary intake affects
many biological systems including brain and neurological health. This study
determined if exposure to a high fat diet (HFD) or caloric restriction (CR)
altered post-concussion susceptibility or resiliency using a rodent model of
pediatric concussion. Rats were maintained on HFD, CR, or standard diet (STD)
throughout life (including the prenatal period and weaning). At postnatal day 30,
male and female rats experienced a concussion or a sham injury which was followed
by 17 days of testing. Prefrontal cortex and hippocampus tissue was collected for
molecular profiling. Gene expression changes in BDNF, CREB, DNMT1, FGF-2, IGF1,
LEP, PGC-1a, SIRT1, Tau, and TERT were analyzed with respect to injury and diet. 
Analysis of telomere length (TL) using peripheral skin cells and brain tissue
found that TL in skin significantly correlated with TL in brain tissue and TL was
affected by dietary intake and injury status. With respect to mTBI outcomes, diet
was correlated with recovery as animals on the HFD often displayed poorer
performance than animals on the CR diet. Molecular analysis demonstrated that
diet induced epigenetic changes that can be associated with differences in
individual predisposition and resiliency to post-concussion syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4318392
PMID: 25698949  [PubMed]


4. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 28;35(4):1659-74. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2925-14.2015.

The role of telomerase protein TERT in Alzheimer's disease and in tau-related
pathology in vitro.

Spilsbury A(1), Miwa S(1), Attems J(2), Saretzki G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Newcastle University Institute for Ageing, Campus for Ageing and Vitality,
Institute for Cell and Molecular Bioscience, and. (2)Newcastle University
Institute for Ageing, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Institute of Neuroscience, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, UK. (3)Newcastle University
Institute for Ageing, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Institute for Cell and
Molecular Bioscience, and gabriele.saretzki@newcastle.ac.uk.

The telomerase reverse transcriptase protein TERT has recently been demonstrated 
to have a variety of functions both in vitro and in vivo, which are distinct from
its canonical role in telomere extension. In different cellular systems, TERT
protein has been shown to be protective through its interaction with
mitochondria. TERT has previously been found in rodent neurons, and we
hypothesize that it might have a protective function in adult human brain. Here, 
we investigated the expression of TERT at different stages of Alzheimer's disease
pathology (Braak Stages I-VI) in situ and the ability of TERT to protect against 
oxidative damage in an in vitro model of tau pathology. Our data reveal that TERT
is expressed in vitro in mouse neurons and microglia, and in vivo in the
cytoplasm of mature human hippocampal neurons and activated microglia, but is
absent from astrocytes. Intriguingly, hippocampal neurons expressing TERT did not
contain hyperphosphorylated tau. Vice versa, neurons that expressed high levels
of pathological tau did not appear to express TERT protein. TERT protein
colocalized with mitochondria in the hippocampus of Alzheimer's disease brains
(Braak Stage VI), as well as in cultured neurons under conditions of oxidative
stress. Our in vitro data suggest that the absence of TERT increases ROS
generation and oxidative damage in neurons induced by pathological tau. Together,
our findings suggest that TERT protein persists in neurons of the adult human
brain, where it may have a protective role against tau pathology.

Copyright © 2015 Spilsbury et al.

PMCID: PMC4308607
PMID: 25632141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Jan 24;18(7):pyv002. doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyv002.

Telomerase dysregulation in the hippocampus of a rat model of depression:
normalization by lithium.

Wei YB(1), Backlund L(1), Wegener G(1), Mathé AA(1), Lavebratt C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Neurogenetics Unit, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (Mr Wei, Drs Backlund and Lavebratt); Center for
Molecular Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden (Mr Wei, Dr
Lavebratt); Centre for Psychiatric Research and Education, Karolinska Institutet,
Clinic for Affective Disorders, Stockholm, Sweden (Drs Backlund and Mathé);
Translational Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark (Dr Wegener); Centre of Excellence for Pharmaceutical
Sciences, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa (Dr Wegener); and
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Section for Psychiatry, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (Dr Mathé).

BACKGROUND: Telomeres are protective DNA-protein complexes at the ends of each
chromosome, maintained primarily by the enzyme telomerase. Shortening of the
blood leukocyte telomeres is associated with aging, several chronic diseases, and
stress, eg, major depression. Hippocampus is pivotal in the regulation of
cognition and mood and the main brain region of telomerase activity. Whether
there is telomere dysfunction in the hippocampus of depressed subjects is
unknown. Lithium, used in the treatment and relapse prevention of mood disorders,
was found to protect against leukocyte telomere shortening in humans, but the
mechanism has not been elucidated. To answer the questions whether telomeres are 
shortened and the telomerase activity changed in the hippocampus and whether
lithium could reverse the process, we used a genetic model of depression, the
Flinders Sensitive Line rat, and treated the animals with lithium.
METHODS: Telomere length, telomerase reverse transcriptase (Tert) expression,
telomerase activity, and putative mediators of telomerase activity were
investigated in the hippocampus of these animals.
RESULTS: The naïve Flinders Sensitive Line had shorter telomere length,
downregulated Tert expression, reduced brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels, 
and reduced telomerase activity compared with the Flinders Resistant Line
controls. Lithium treatment normalized the Tert expression and telomerase
activity in the Flinders Sensitive Line and upregulated ß-catenin.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report showing telomere dysregulation in
hippocampus of a well-defined depression model and restorative effects of lithium
treatment. If replicated in other models of mood disorder, the findings will
contribute to understanding both the telomere function and the mechanism of
lithium action in hippocampus of depressed patients.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMID: 25618407  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Nov 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Lack of JWA Enhances Neurogenesis and Long-Term Potentiation in Hippocampal
Dentate Gyrus Leading to Spatial Cognitive Potentiation.

Sha S(1), Xu J, Lu ZH, Hong J, Qu WJ, Zhou JW, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, 210029, China.

JWA (Arl6ip5), a homologous gene of glutamate-transporter-associated protein 3-18
(GTRAP3-18) and addicsin, is highly expressed in hippocampus. We generated
systemic and neuronal JWA knockout (JWA-KO and JWA-nKO) mice to investigate the
influence of JWA deficiency on spatial cognitive performance, process of
neurogenesis, and induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampal
dentate gyrus (DG). In comparison with wild-type (WT) mice and JWA (loxP/loxP)
(control of JWA-nKO) mice, 8-week-old JWA-KO mice and JWA-nKO mice showed spatial
cognitive potentiation as assessed by Morris water maze test. In hippocampal DG
of JWA-nKO mice, either survival and migration or neurite growth of newborn
neurons were significantly enhanced without the changes in proliferation and
differentiation of stem cells. In addition, the increase of LTP amplitude and the
decline of LTP threshold were observed in DG, but not in CA1 region, of JWA-nKO
mice compared to control mice. The levels of hippocampal FAK, Akt, and mTOR
phosphorylation in JWA-nKO mice were higher than those in control mice. The PI3K 
or FAK inhibitor could abolish the enhanced neurogenesis and LTP induction in
JWA-nKO mice, which was accompanied by disappearance of the spatial cognitive
potentiation. The treatment of JWA-nKO mice with 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine
(AZT), a telomerase inhibitor, suppressed not only the enhanced neurogenesis but 
also the enhanced LTP induction in DG, but it did not affect the LTP induction in
CA1 region. The results suggest that the JWA deficiency through cascading
FAK-PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway increases the newborn neurons and enhances the LTP
induction in hippocampal DG, which leads to the spatial cognitive potentiation.

PMID: 25432888  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Oct;71(10):1247-54. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1926.

Effect of leukocyte telomere length on total and regional brain volumes in a
large population-based cohort.

King KS(1), Kozlitina J(2), Rosenberg RN(3), Peshock RM(1), McColl RW(1), Garcia 
CK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas. (2)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas3Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas. (3)Department of
Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas5Editor, JAMA
Neurology.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol. 2014 Dec;71(12):1580.

IMPORTANCE: Telomere length has been associated with dementia and psychological
stress, but its relationship with human brain size is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if peripheral blood telomere length is associated with
brain volume.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Peripheral blood leukocyte telomere length and
brain volumes were measured for 1960 individuals in the Dallas Heart Study, a
population-based, probability sample of Dallas County, Texas, residents, with a
median (25th-75th percentile) age of 50 (42-58) years. Global and 48 regional
brain volumes were assessed from the automated analysis of magnetic resonance
imaging.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Telomere length and global and regional brain
volumes.
RESULTS: Leukocyte telomere length was associated with total cerebral volume (ß
[SE], 0.06 [0.01], P?<.001) including white and cortical gray matter volume (ß
[SE], 0.04 [0.01], P?=?.002; ß [SE], 0.07 [0.02], P?<.001, respectively),
independent of age, sex, ethnicity, and total intracranial volume. While age was 
associated with the size of most subsegmental regions of the cerebral cortex,
telomere length was associated with certain subsegmental regions. Compared with
age, telomere length (TL) explained a sizeable proportion of the variance in
volume of the hippocampus, amygdala, and inferior temporal region (hippocampus:
ßTL [SE], 0.08 [0.02], R2, 0.91% vs ßage [SE], -0.16 [0.02], R2, 3.80%; amygdala:
ßTL [SE], 0.08 [0.02], R2, 0.78% vs ßage [SE],-0.19 [0.02], R2,4.63%; inferior
temporal: ßTL [SE], 0.07 [0.02], R2, 0.92% vs ßage [SE], -0.14 [0.02], R2, 3.98%)
(P?<.001 for all). The association of telomere length and the size of the
inferior and superior parietal, hippocampus, and fusiform regions was stronger in
individuals older than 50 years than younger individuals (inferior parietal: ß>50
[SE], 0.13 [0.03], P?<.001 vs ß=50 [SE], 0.02 [0.02], P?=?.51, P for interaction 
= .001; superior parietal: ß>50 [SE], 0.11 [0.03], P?<.001 vs ß=50 [SE], 0.01
[0.02], P?=?.71, P for interaction = .004; hippocampus: ß>50 [SE], 0.10 [0.03],
P?=?.004 vs ß=50 [SE], 0.05 [0.02], P?=?.07, P for interaction = .04; fusiform:
ß>50 [SE], 0.09 [0.03], P?=?.002, ß=50 [SE], 0.03 [0.02], P?=?.31, P for
interaction = .03). The volume of the hippocampus, amygdala, superior and
inferior temporal, precuneus, lateral orbitofrontal, posterior cingulate,
thalamus and ventral diencephalon were independently associated with telomere
length after adjustment for all covariates (age, gender, ethnicity, total
intracranial volume, body mass index, blood pressure, diabetes, smoking status,
and APOE genotype).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first population-based
study to date to evaluate telomere length as an independent predictor of global
and regional brain size. Future studies are needed to determine how telomere
length and anatomic structural changes are related to cognitive function,
dementia, and psychological disease.

PMID: 25090243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jul 1;71(7):921-3. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.870.

Relationship between leukocyte telomere length, telomerase activity, and
hippocampal volume in early aging.

Jacobs EG(1), Epel ES(2), Lin J(3), Blackburn EH(3), Rasgon NL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco. (4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.

PMID: 25023551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 1;9(7):e101437. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101437. eCollection
2014.

Infant-caregiver experiences alter telomere length in the brain.

Asok A(1), Bernard K(2), Rosen JB(1), Dozier M(1), Roth TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Delaware, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
Newark, DE, United States of America. (2)Stony Brook University, Department of
Psychology, Stony Brook, NY, United States of America.

Following adverse childhood experiences, high quality maternal care can protect
against accelerated telomere shortening in peripheral cells. It is less clear,
however, how telomere length in the brain is influenced by early caregiving
experiences. Using rats, we investigated if quality of care (i.e., aversive or
nurturing care outside of the homecage) during the first seven days of postnatal 
(PN) life affected telomere length in the adult brain (PN90) of male and female
rats. At PN90, we found that nurturing care outside of the homecage was
associated with longer telomeres in the medial prefrontal cortex relative to
nurturing care inside the homecage (i.e., normal maternal care) and aversive care
outside of the homecage. Further, pups exposed to aversive care outside of the
homecage demonstrated longer telomeres in the amygdala relative to pups exposed
to nurturing care inside the homecage. These effects were specific to females. No
differences in telomere length between caregiving conditions were observed in the
ventral hippocampus. Thus, positive and negative early-life experiences result in
long-term, sex-specific changes of telomeres in the brain.

PMCID: PMC4077840
PMID: 24983884  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 30;9(6):e101291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101291.
eCollection 2014.

Ginsenoside Rg1 prevents cognitive impairment and hippocampus senescence in a rat
model of D-galactose-induced aging.

Zhu J(1), Mu X(1), Zeng J(2), Xu C(1), Liu J(1), Zhang M(1), Li C(1), Chen J(3), 
Li T(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Laboratory of Stem Cells and Tissue
Engineering, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)The Land Force
Lintong Sanatorium, Xi'an, Shanxi, China. (3)Chongqing Stem Cell Therapy
Engineering Technical Center, Chongqing, China.

Neurogenesis continues throughout the lifetime in the hippocampus, while the rate
declines with brain aging. It has been hypothesized that reduced neurogenesis may
contribute to age-related cognitive impairment. Ginsenoside Rg1 is an active
ingredient of Panax ginseng in traditional Chinese medicine, which exerts
anti-oxidative and anti-aging effects. This study explores the neuroprotective
effect of ginsenoside Rg1 on the hippocampus of the D-gal (D-galactose) induced
aging rat model. Sub-acute aging was induced in male SD rats by subcutaneous
injection of D-gal (120 mg/kg·d) for 42 days, and the rats were treated with
ginsenoside Rg1 (20 mg/kg·d, intraperitoneally) or normal saline for 28 days
after 14 days of D-gal injection. In another group, normal male SD rats were
treated with ginsenoside Rg1 alone (20 mg/kg·d, intraperitoneally) for 28 days.
It showed that administration of ginsenoside Rg1 significantly attenuated all the
D-gal-induced changes in the hippocampus, including cognitive capacity,
senescence-related markers and hippocampal neurogenesis, compared with the
D-gal-treated rats. Further investigation showed that ginsenoside Rg1 protected
NSCs/NPCs (neural stem cells/progenitor cells) shown by increased level of SOX-2 
expression; reduced astrocytes activation shown by decrease level of Aeg-1
expression; increased the hippocampal cell proliferation; enhanced the activity
of the antioxidant enzymes GSH-Px (glutathione peroxidase) and SOD (Superoxide
Dismutase); decreased the levels of IL-1ß, IL-6 and TNF-a, which are the
proinflammatory cytokines; increased the telomere lengths and telomerase
activity; and down-regulated the mRNA expression of cellular senescence
associated genes p53, p21Cip1/Waf1 and p19Arf in the hippocampus of aged rats.
Our data provides evidence that ginsenoside Rg1 can improve cognitive ability,
protect NSCs/NPCs and promote neurogenesis by enhancing the antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory capacity in the hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC4076296
PMID: 24979747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Sante Ment Que. 2013 Autumn;38(2):19-34.

[Review of the effects of mindfulness meditation on mental and physical health
and its mechanisms of action].

[Article in French]

Ngô TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Montréal; Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal.

Interventions based on mindfulness have become increasingly popular. This article
reviews the empirical literature on its effects on mental and physical health,
discusses presumed mechanisms of action as well as its proposed neurobiological
underpinning. Mindfulness is associated with increased well-being as well as
reduced cognitive reactivity and behavioral avoidance. It seems to contribute to 
enhance immune functions, diminish inflammation, diminish the reactivity of the
autonomic nervous system, increase telomerase activity, lead to higher levels of 
plasmatic melatonin and serotonin. It enhances the quality of life for patients
suffering from chronic pain, fibromylagia and HIV infection. It facilitates
adaptation to the diagnosis of cancer and diabetes. It seems to lead to
symptomatic improvement in irritable bowel syndrome, chronic fatigue syndrome,
hot flashes, insomnia, stress related hyperphagia. It diminishes craving in
substance abuse. The proposed mechanism of action are enhanced metacognitive
conscience, interoceptive exposure, experiential acceptance, self-management,
attention control, memory, relaxation. Six mechanism of actions for which
neurological underpinnings have been published are: attention regulation
(anterior cingulate cortex), body awareness (insula, temporoparietal junction),
emotion regulation (modulation of the amygdala by the lateral prefrontal cortex),
cognitive re-evaluation (activation of the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex or
diminished activity in prefrontal regions), exposure/extinction/reconsolidation
(ventromedial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala) and flexible self-concept
(prefrontal median cortex, posterior cingulated cortex, insula, temporoparietal
junction). The neurobiological effects of meditation are described. These are:
(1) the deactivation of the default mode network that generates spontaneous
thoughts, contributes to the maintenance of the autobiographical self and is
associated with anxiety and depression; (2) the anterior cingulate cortex that
underpins attention functions; (3) the anterior insula associated with the
perception of visceral sensation, the detection of heartbeat and respiratory
rate, and the affective response to pain; (4) the posterior cingulate cortex
which helps to understand the context from which a stimulus emerges; (5) the
temporoparietal junction which assumes a central role in empathy and compassion; 
(6) the amygdala implicated in fear responses. The article ends with a short
review of the empirical basis supporting the efficacy for mindfulness based
intervention and suggested directions for future research.

PMID: 24719001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Brain. 2014 Jan;137(Pt 1):137-52. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt303. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Zinc deficiency dysregulates the synaptic ProSAP/Shank scaffold and might
contribute to autism spectrum disorders.

Grabrucker S(1), Jannetti L, Eckert M, Gaub S, Chhabra R, Pfaender S, Mangus K,
Reddy PP, Rankovic V, Schmeisser MJ, Kreutz MR, Ehret G, Boeckers TM, Grabrucker 
AM.

Author information: 
(1)1 WG Molecular Analysis of Synaptopathies, Neurology Department, Neurocentre
of Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

Proteins of the ProSAP/Shank family act as major organizing scaffolding elements 
within the postsynaptic density of excitatory synapses. Deletions, mutations or
the downregulation of these molecules has been linked to autism spectrum
disorders, the related Phelan McDermid Syndrome or Alzheimer's disease.
ProSAP/Shank proteins are targeted to synapses depending on binding to zinc,
which is a prerequisite for the assembly of the ProSAP/Shank scaffold. To gain
insight into whether the previously reported assembly of ProSAP/Shank through
zinc ions provides a crossing point between genetic forms of autism spectrum
disorder and zinc deficiency as an environmental risk factor for autism spectrum 
disorder, we examined the interplay between zinc and ProSAP/Shank in vitro and in
vivo using neurobiological approaches. Our data show that low postsynaptic zinc
availability affects the activity dependent increase in ProSAP1/Shank2 and
ProSAP2/Shank3 levels at the synapse in vitro and that a loss of synaptic
ProSAP1/Shank2 and ProSAP2/Shank3 occurs in a mouse model for acute and prenatal 
zinc deficiency. Zinc-deficient animals displayed abnormalities in behaviour such
as over-responsivity and hyperactivity-like behaviour (acute zinc deficiency) and
autism spectrum disorder-related behaviour such as impairments in vocalization
and social behaviour (prenatal zinc deficiency). Most importantly, a low zinc
status seems to be associated with an increased incidence rate of seizures,
hypotonia, and attention and hyperactivity issues in patients with
Phelan-McDermid syndrome, which is caused by haploinsufficiency of
ProSAP2/Shank3. We suggest that the molecular underpinning of prenatal zinc
deficiency as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder may unfold through the
deregulation of zinc-binding ProSAP/Shank family members.

PMID: 24277719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biomed Res. 2012 Sep;26(5):381-8. doi: 10.7555/JBR.26.20110078. Epub 2012 Apr
18.

Overexpression of the mTERT gene by adenoviral vectors promotes the proliferation
of neuronal stem cells in vitro and stimulates neurogenesis in the hippocampus of
mice.

Liu M(1), Hu Y, Zhu L, Chen C, Zhang Y, Sun W, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pharmacy College, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

We sought to construct the adenoviral vector carrying the gene encoding mouse
telomerase reverse transcriptase (mTERT), as well as detect its expression and
effect on the proliferation of neuronal stem cells. mTERT was amplified by RT-PCR
and then the eukaryotic expression vector of pDC-EGFP-TERT was constructed. After
DNA sequence analysis, we detected that there were 293 cells transfected with
pDC-EGFP-TERT and helper adenovirus plasmid pBHG lox ?E1, and three Cre using
Lipofectamine 2000 mediation, named Ad-mTERT-GFP, to package adenoviral
particles. The Ad-mTERT-GFP was used to infect neuronal stem cells and then the
expression and activity of mTERT were detected. In addition, Bromodeoxyuridine
labeling test identified the impact of mTERT overexpression on proliferation of
neuronal stem cells. The recombinant adenoviral vector confirmed that mTERT was
successfully constructed. Overexpression of mTERT stimulated the proliferation of
neuronal stem cells both in vitro and in vivo. mTERT overexpression via
adenoviral vector carrying mTERT cDNA upregulated the ability of proliferation in
neuronal stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3613735
PMID: 23554775  [PubMed]


14. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Dec 27;5:697. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-697.

The impact of voluntary exercise on relative telomere length in a rat model of
developmental stress.

Botha M(1), Grace L, Bugarith K, Russell VA, Kidd M, Seedat S, Hemmings SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to early adverse events can result in the development of
later psychopathology, and is often associated with cognitive impairment. This
may be due to accelerated cell aging, which can be catalogued by attritioned
telomeres. Exercise enhances neurogenesis and has been proposed to buffer the
effect of psychological stress on telomere length. This study aimed to
investigate the impact of early developmental stress and voluntary exercise on
telomere length in the ventral hippocampus (VH) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) of
the rat. Forty-five male Sprague-Dawley rats were categorised into four groups:
maternally separated runners (MSR), maternally separated non-runners (MSnR),
non-maternally separated runners (nMSR) and non-maternally separated non-runners 
(nMSnR). Behavioural analyses were conducted to assess anxiety-like behaviour and
memory performance in the rats, after which relative telomere length was measured
using qPCR.
RESULTS: Maternally separated (MS) rats exhibited no significant differences in
either anxiety levels or memory performance on the elevated-plus maze and the
open field compared to non-maternally separated rats at 49 days of age. Exercised
rats displayed increased levels of anxiety on the day that they were removed from
the cages with attached running wheels, as well as improved spatial learning and 
temporal recognition memory compared to non-exercised rats. Exploratory post-hoc 
analyses revealed that maternally separated non-exercised rats exhibited
significantly longer telomere length in the VH compared to those who were not
maternally separated; however, exercise appeared to cancel this effect since
there was no difference in VH telomere length between maternally separated and
non-maternally separated runners.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased telomere length in the VH of maternally separated
non-exercised rats may be indicative of reduced cellular proliferation, which
could, in turn, indicate hippocampal dysfunction. This effect on telomere length 
was not observed in exercised rats, indicating that voluntary exercise may buffer
against the progressive changes in telomere length caused by alterations in
maternal care early in life. In future, larger sample sizes will be needed to
validate results obtained in the present study and obtain a more accurate
representation of the effect that psychological stress and voluntary exercise
have on telomere length.

PMCID: PMC3543200
PMID: 23270390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Acupunct Electrother Res. 2012;37(1):13-47.

Newly discovered quick, non-invasive screening method of bone marrow malignancies
including various leukemias, Hodgkin's lymphoma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, &
multiple myeloma by abnormality of small rectangular area within bone marrow
organ representation areas of the face.

Omura Y(1), O'Young B, Jones M, Nihrane A, Duvvi H, Paluch K, Shimotsuura Y, Ohki
M.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Disease Research Foundation. icaet@yahoo.com

Diagnoses of bone marrow associated malignancies such as Acute & Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia, Acute & Chronic Myelogenous (Myeloid) Leukemia, Hodgkin's
Lymphoma & Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma, and Multiple Myeloma are often missed without 
a blood test. However, in 2008, Omura Y reported several newly discovered organ
representation areas that exist between the lower end of the eyebrows and upper
end of the upper eyelid. This space was divided into 5 organ representation
areas. The first space (more than 1/4 of entire space) near the side of the face 
(temple) is the bone marrow representation area (BMRA). Therefore, we examined
the bone marrow representation areas non-invasively using the Bi-Digital O-Ring
Test (BDORT). When the small rectangular shaped part of the BMRA is strong
negative (-) with more than -2, often there is a malignancy associated with bone 
marrow. In this area, we found 1) Integrin alpha5beta1 & Oncogen C-fos Ab2
increased very significantly between 125-300 ng BDORT units; 2) very high
Chrysotile Asbestos (0.11-0.14 mg); 3) markedly reduced Acetylcholine of less
than 1 ng; 4) significantly reduced telomere of less than 1 yg (= 10(-24) g); and
5) Increased 8-OH-dG (often more than 5 ng). Once the abnormal small rectangular 
area is localized by BDORT, by detecting the specific microscope slide which
produces EMF (electromagnetic field) resonance, one can diagnose these
malignancies non-invasively in about 10 minutes. When a subject has any one of
the above 7 types of bone marrow associated malignancies, the 5 aforementioned
abnormal parameters can be detected. When Acetylcholine is markedly reduced to
0.25 ng or less, 8-OH-dG is 10 ng or higher, and Sirtuin 1 (one of the 7
mammalian longevity genes products) in both the Hippocampus and the body is 0.025
pg or less, most of the patients have a very poor prognosis. However, we found
that increasing normal cell telomere & longevity gene product Sirtuin 1 can often
improve both pathology & prognosis. All measurements are in BDORT units (the
weight required to produce maximum EMF resonance).

PMID: 22852211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034292. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

Longer leukocyte telomere length is associated with smaller hippocampal volume
among non-demented APOE e3/e3 subjects.

Wikgren M(1), Karlsson T, Lind J, Nilbrink T, Hultdin J, Sleegers K, Van
Broeckhoven C, Roos G, Nilsson LG, Nyberg L, Adolfsson R, Norrback KF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychiatry, Department of Clinical Sciences, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden. mikael.wikgren@psychiat.umu.se

Telomere length shortens with cellular division, and leukocyte telomere length is
used as a marker for systemic telomere length. The hippocampus hosts adult
neurogenesis and is an important structure for episodic memory, and carriers of
the apolipoprotein E e4 allele exhibit higher hippocampal atrophy rates and
differing telomere dynamics compared with non-carriers. The authors investigated 
whether leukocyte telomere length was associated with hippocampal volume in 57
cognitively intact subjects (29 e3/e3 carriers; 28 e4 carriers) aged 49-79 yr.
Leukocyte telomere length correlated inversely with left (r(s)?=?-0.465;
p?=?0.011), right (r(s)?=?-0.414; p?=?0.025), and total hippocampus volume
(r(s)?=?-0.519; p?=?0.004) among APOE e3/e3 carriers, but not among e4 carriers. 
However, the e4 carriers fit with the general correlation pattern exhibited by
the e3/e3 carriers, as e4 carriers on average had longer telomeres and smaller
hippocampi compared with e3/e3 carriers. The relationship observed can be
interpreted as long telomeres representing a history of relatively low cellular
proliferation, reflected in smaller hippocampal volumes. The results support the 
potential of leukocyte telomere length being used as a biomarker for tapping
functional and structural processes of the aging brain.

PMCID: PMC3323621
PMID: 22506016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. RNA. 2012 Jan;18(1):166-75. doi: 10.1261/rna.028431.111. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

A quick and simple FISH protocol with hybridization-sensitive fluorescent linear 
oligodeoxynucleotide probes.

Wang DO(1), Matsuno H, Ikeda S, Nakamura A, Yanagisawa H, Hayashi Y, Okamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan. dwang@icems.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a powerful tool used in karyotyping,
cytogenotyping, cancer diagnosis, species specification, and gene-expression
analysis. Although widely used, conventional FISH protocols are cumbersome and
time consuming. We have now developed a FISH method using exciton-controlled
hybridization-sensitive fluorescent oligodeoxynucleotide (ECHO) probes. ECHO-FISH
uses a 25-min protocol from fixation to mounting that includes no stringency
washing steps. We use ECHO-FISH to detect both specific DNA and RNA sequences
with multicolor probes. ECHO-FISH is highly reproducible, stringent, and
compatible with other fluorescent cellular labeling techniques. The resolution
allows detection of intranuclear speckles of poly(A) RNA in HeLa cells and
dissociated hippocampal primary cultures, and mRNAs in the distal dendrites of
hippocampal neurons. We also demonstrate detection of telomeric and centromeric
DNA on metaphase mouse chromosomes. The simplicity of the ECHO-FISH method will
likely accelerate cytogenetic and gene-expression analysis with high resolution.

PMCID: PMC3261739
PMID: 22101241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Feb 14;227(2):497-507. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.10.009. Epub
2011 Oct 18.

New neurons in an aged brain.

Lee SW(1), Clemenson GD, Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.

Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is one of the most robust forms of synaptic
plasticity in the nervous system and occurs throughout life. However, the rate of
neurogenesis declines dramatically with age. Older animals have significantly
less neural progenitor cell proliferation, neuronal differentiation, and newborn 
neuron survival compared to younger animals. Intrinsic properties of neural
progenitor cells, such as gene transcription and telomerase activity, change with
age, which may contribute to the observed decline in neurogenesis. In addition,
age-related changes in the local cells of the neurogenic niche may no longer
provide neural progenitor cells with the cell-cell contact and soluble cues
necessary for hippocampal neurogenesis. Astrocytes, microglia, and endothelial
cells undergo changes in morphology and signaling properties with age, altering
the foundation of the neurogenic niche. While most studies indicate a correlation
between decreased hippocampal neurogenesis and impaired performance in
hippocampus-dependent cognitive tasks in aged mice, a few have demonstrated that 
young and aged mice are equivalent in their cognitive ability. Here, we summarize
the different behavioral paradigms to test hippocampus-dependent cognition and
the need to develop neurogenesis-dependent tasks.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3264739
PMID: 22024433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Age (Dordr). 2012 Dec;34(6):1421-33. doi: 10.1007/s11357-011-9319-0. Epub 2011
Oct 5.

Psychological stress and aging: role of glucocorticoids (GCs).

Hasan KM(1), Rahman MS, Arif KM, Sobhani ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering Discipline, Khulna University,
Bangladesh. mdihsn@hotmail.com

Psychological stress has extreme adverse consequences on health. However, the
molecular mechanisms that mediate and accelerate the process of aging due to
stress hormone are not well defined. This review has focused on diverse molecular
paths that come out in response to chronic psychological stress via releasing of 
excessive glucocorticoids (GCs), involved in the aging process. GCs suppress
transcription of nuclear cell adhesion molecules which impair synaptic
plasticity, memory formation, and cognitive ability. Again, GCs promote muscle
atrophy by means of motivating ubiquitin proteasome system and can repress muscle
protein synthesis by inhibition of PI3-kinase/Akt pathway. GCs also inhibit
interleukin-2 synthesis through suppressing T cell receptor signal that leads to 
loss of T cell activation, proliferation, and B-cell activation. Moreover, GCs
increase the expression of collagenase-3, RANK ligand, and colony stimulating
factor-1 that induce bone resorption. In general, stress-induced GCs can play
causal role for aging and age-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC3528378
PMID: 21971999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 24;31(34):12258-69. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0805-11.2011.

Hippocampal telomerase is involved in the modulation of depressive behaviors.

Zhou QG(1), Hu Y, Wu DL, Zhu LJ, Chen C, Jin X, Luo CX, Wu HY, Zhang J, Zhu DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China.

Telomere and telomerase alterations have been reported in mood disorders.
However, the role of telomerase in depression remains unclear. Here we show that 
chronic mild stress (CMS) led to a significant decrease in telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT) level and telomerase activity in the hippocampus. Treatment 
with antidepressant fluoxetine reversed the CMS-induced TERT and telomerase
activity changes. Inhibiting telomerase by systemic administration (100 mg ·
kg(-1) · d(-1), i.p., for 14 d), intrahippocampal microinjection (0.7 µmol, 2
µl), or infusion (using an osmotic minipump, 0.134 µg/µl, 0.25 µl/h) of
3'-azido-deoxythymidine (AZT) resulted in depression-like behaviors and impaired 
hippocampal neurogenesis in mice. In contrast, overexpressing telomerase by
intrahippocampal infusion of recombinant adenovirus vector expressing mouse TERT 
(Ad-mTERT-GFP) led to neurogenesis upregulation, produced antidepressant-like
behaviors, and prevented the CMS-induced behavioral modifications. Disrupting
neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus by X-irradiation (15 Gy) of a restricted region
of mouse brain containing the hippocampus abolished the antidepressant-like
effect of Ad-mTERT-GFP. Additionally, AZT had no effect on DNA polymerase
activity and did not cause cell damage in vitro and in vivo. Microinjection of
AZT into the subventricular zone of lateral ventricle (0.7 µmol, 2 µl) inhibited 
local neurogenesis but had no behavioral effect. These results suggest that
hippocampal telomerase is involved in the modulation of depression-related
behaviors, possibly by regulating adult neurogenesis.

PMID: 21865469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Brain. 2011 Jul;134(Pt 7):2044-56. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr133. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Telomere shortening reduces Alzheimer's disease amyloid pathology in mice.

Rolyan H(1), Scheffold A, Heinrich A, Begus-Nahrmann Y, Langkopf BH, Hölter SM,
Vogt-Weisenhorn DM, Liss B, Wurst W, Lie DC, Thal DR, Biber K, Rudolph KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Max-Planck-Research Department for Stem
Cell Aging, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder of the elderly and advancing 
age is the major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease development. Telomere
shortening represents one of the molecular causes of ageing that limits the
proliferative capacity of cells, including neural stem cells. Studies on telomere
lengths in patients with Alzheimer's disease have revealed contrary results and
the functional role of telomere shortening on brain ageing and Alzheimer's
disease is not known. Here, we have investigated the effects of telomere
shortening on adult neurogenesis and Alzheimer's disease progression in mice. The
study shows that aged telomerase knockout mice with short telomeres (G3Terc-/-)
exhibit reduced dentate gyrus neurogenesis and loss of neurons in hippocampus and
frontal cortex, associated with short-term memory deficit in comparison to mice
with long telomere reserves (Terc+/+). In contrast, telomere shortening improved 
the spatial learning ability of ageing APP23 transgenic mice, a mouse model for
Alzheimer's disease. Telomere shortening was also associated with an activation
of microglia in ageing amyloid-free brain. However, in APP23 transgenic mice,
telomere shortening reduced both amyloid plaque pathology and reactive
microgliosis. Together, these results provide the first experimental evidence
that telomere shortening, despite impairing adult neurogenesis and maintenance of
post-mitotic neurons, can slow down the progression of amyloid plaque pathology
in Alzheimer's disease, possibly involving telomere-dependent effects on
microglia activation.

PMID: 21672962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Acupunct Electrother Res. 2011;36(3-4):287-309.

New clinical findings on the longevity gene in disease, health, & longevity:
Sirtuin 1 often decreases with advanced age & serious diseases in most parts of
the human body, while relatively high & constant Sirtuin 1 regardless of age was 
first found in the hippocampus of supercentenarians.

Omura Y(1), Lu DP, Jones M, O'Young B, Duvvi H, Paluch K, Shimotsuura Y, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Disease Research Foundation, USA. icaet@yahoo.com

The expression of the longevity gene, Sirtuin 1, was non-invasively measured
using Electro-Magnetic Field (EMF) resonance phenomenon between a known amount of
polyclonal antibody of the C-terminal of Sirtuin 1 & Sirtuin 1 molecule inside of
the body. Our measurement of over 100 human adult males and females, ranging
between 20-122 years old, indicated that the majority of subjects had Sirtuin 1
levels of 5-10 pg BDORT units in most parts of the body. When Sirtuin 1 was less 
than 1 pg, the majority of the people had various degrees of tumors or other
serious diseases. When Sirtuin 1 levels were less than 0.25 pg BDORT units, a
high incidence of AIDS was also detected. Very few people had Sirtuin 1 levels of
over 25 pg BDORT units in most parts of the body. We selected 7 internationally
recognized supercentenarians who lived between 110-122 years old. To our
surprise, most of their body Sirtuin 1 levels were between 2.5-10 pg BDORT units.
However, by evaluating different parts of the brain, we found that both sides of 
the Hippocampus had a much higher amount of Sirtuin 1, between 25-100 pg BDORT
units. With most subjects, Sirtuin 1 was found to be higher in the Hippocampus
than in the rest of the body and remains relatively constant regardless of age.
We found that Aspartame, plastic eye contact lenses, and asbestos in dental
apparatuses, which reduce normal cell telomeres, also significantly reduce
Sirtuin 1. In addition, we found that increasing normal cell telomere by
electrical or mechanical stimulation of True ST-36 increases the expression of
the Sirtuin 1 gene in people in which expression is low. This measurement of
Sirtuin 1 in the Hippocampus has become a reliable indicator for detecting
potential longevity of an individual.

PMID: 22443029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Brain Behav Immun. 2011 Jul;25(5):971-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2010.10.014. Epub
2010 Oct 21.

Physical exercise increases adult neurogenesis and telomerase activity, and
improves behavioral deficits in a mouse model of schizophrenia.

Wolf SA(1), Melnik A, Kempermann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Neurobiology, University of Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland. Susanne.wolf@anatom.uzh.ch

Epidemiological studies indicate that among other early life challenges, maternal
infection with influenza during pregnancy increased the risk of developing
schizophrenia in the child. One morphological manifestation of schizophrenia is
hippocampal atrophy. In the hippocampus, playing a key role in learning and
memory formation, new granule cell neurons are produced throughout life from
resident precursor cells. We hypothesize that individuals exposed to a maternal
anti-viral immune response would presumably enter life with a challenged neural
precursor cell pool and might later be susceptible to psychiatric pathologies due
to reduced adult neurogenesis. We used the injection of double-stranded RNA
(polyriboinosinicpolyribocytidylic acid - PolyI:C) in pregnant C57Bl/6 and
nestin-GFP reporter mice to induce a maternal viral-like infection and
schizophrenia-like behavior in the offspring. In the progeny we found impairments
in the open field test and in sensorimotor gating as measured by pre-pulse
inhibition of the startle response. The behavioral deficits were accompanied by
reduced baseline adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Telomerase activity in neural
precursor cells was reduced from birth on and telomere shortening was found in
the same cell type in adult life. When we subjected the progeny of viral-like
infected dams to voluntary exercise, a known stimulus of adult hippocampal
neurogenesis, we could rescue the phenotype in behavior, adult neurogenesis, and 
cellular senescence. In summary, maternal viral-like immune response reduced
telomerase activity and resulted in telomere shortening in neural precursor
cells. Further we demonstrate that beneficial behavioral and cellular effects
induced by exercise can be studied in a rodent model of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 May;24(5):588-93.

[Telomerase reverse transcriptase expression and cell apoptosis during hypoxia
ischemia brain damage in neonatal rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao F(1), Qu Y, Tang B, Mao M, Mu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu Sichuan 610041, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) and cell apoptosis in neonatal rats with hypoxia ischemia brain damage
(HIBD).
METHODS: A total of 42 7-day-old SD rats (12-18 g, male or female) were randomly 
allocated into sham-operation group (n = 6) and hypoxia-ischemia (HI) group (n = 
36). In HI group, the rats were anesthetized with ethyl ether. The right common
carotid artery (CCA) was exposed and permanently ligated with a 7-0 silk suture
through a midline cervical incision. A duration of 2.5 hours of hypoxia (8%O2 /
92%N2) was used to produce HIBD model. For sham-operation group, the CCA was
exposed without ligation or hypoxia. The brain tissues were harvested at 4, 8,
12, 24, 48, and 72 hours after completion of an HI insult. The expressions of
TERT and CC3 were detected by immunohistochemical staining. The apoptosis cells
were detected with TUNEL staining method.
RESULTS: The expression of TERT was increased at 4 hours after HI injury,
significantly increased at 24-48 hours and then decreased at 72 hours. The
expression of CC3 was increased at 4 hours after HI injury, significantly
increased at 24 hours and still maintained high expression at 48 hours and 72
hours. However, in the sham-operation group, both the expressions of TERT and CC3
were extremely low. The expression of TERT and CC3 were higher in the HI group
than in the sham-operation group at different time points, and the differences
were significant (P < 0.05). The TUNEL staining showed that the positive cells in
hippocampus and cortical areas were increased at 4 hours after HI injury,
significantly increased at 24-48 hours and maintained a high level at 72 hours.
However, there was few positive cells in the sham-operation group. There were
significant differences between the HI group and the sham-operation group at
different time points (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: TERT could be induced by HI in neonatal rats, and might have a
protective role in regulating the cell apoptosis in the neonatal HIBD.

PMID: 20540267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Neurogenetics. 2010 May;11(2):145-51. doi: 10.1007/s10048-009-0226-9. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

Atp10a, a gene adjacent to the PWS/AS gene cluster, is not imprinted in mouse and
is insensitive to the PWS-IC.

DuBose AJ(1), Johnstone KA, Smith EY, Hallett RA, Resnick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, 32610-0266, USA.

Mutations affecting a cluster of coordinately regulated imprinted genes located
at 15q11-q13 underlie both Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome
(AS). Disruption of the predominately maternally expressed UBE3A locus is
sufficient to meet diagnostic criteria for AS. However, AS patients with a
deletion of the entire PWS/AS locus often have more severe traits than patients
with point mutations in UBE3A suggesting that other genes contribute to the
syndrome. ATP10A resides 200 kb telomeric to UBE3A and is of uncertain imprinted 
status. An initial report indicated bialleleic expression of the murine Atp10a in
all tissues, but a subsequent report suggests that Atp10a is predominantly
maternally expressed in the hippocampus and olfactory bulb. To resolve this
discrepancy, we investigated Atp10a allelic expression in the brain, DNA
methylation status, and sensitivity to mutations of the PWS imprinting center, an
element required for imprinted gene expression in the region. We report that
Atp10a is biallelically expressed in both the newborn and adult brain, and Atp10a
allelic expression is insensitive to deletion or mutation of the PWS imprinting
center. The CpG island associated with Atp10a is hypomethylated, a result
consistent with the notion that Atp10a is not an imprinted gene.

PMID: 19894069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 15;18(24):4756-69. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp438. Epub 2009 Sep
26.

A new mouse model for the trisomy of the Abcg1-U2af1 region reveals the
complexity of the combinatorial genetic code of down syndrome.

Pereira PL(1), Magnol L, Sahún I, Brault V, Duchon A, Prandini P, Gruart A, Bizot
JC, Chadefaux-Vekemans B, Deutsch S, Trovero F, Delgado-García JM, Antonarakis
SE, Dierssen M, Herault Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Immunology, Université d'Orléans, UMR6218, Orléans
Cedex 2, France.

Mental retardation in Down syndrome (DS), the most frequent trisomy in humans,
varies from moderate to severe. Several studies both in human and based on mouse 
models identified some regions of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) as linked to
cognitive deficits. However, other intervals such as the telomeric region of
Hsa21 may contribute to the DS phenotype but their role has not yet been
investigated in detail. Here we show that the trisomy of the 12 genes, found in
the 0.59 Mb (Abcg1-U2af1) Hsa21 sub-telomeric region, in mice (Ts1Yah) produced
defects in novel object recognition, open-field and Y-maze tests, similar to
other DS models, but induces an improvement of the hippocampal-dependent spatial 
memory in the Morris water maze along with enhanced and longer lasting long-term 
potentiation in vivo in the hippocampus. Overall, we demonstrate the contribution
of the Abcg1-U2af1 genetic region to cognitive defect in working and short-term
recognition memory in DS models. Increase in copy number of the Abcg1-U2af1
interval leads to an unexpected gain of cognitive function in spatial learning.
Expression analysis pinpoints several genes, such as Ndufv3, Wdr4, Pknox1 and
Cbs, as candidates whose overexpression in the hippocampus might facilitate
learning and memory in Ts1Yah mice. Our work unravels the complexity of
combinatorial genetic code modulating different aspect of mental retardation in
DS patients. It establishes definitely the contribution of the Abcg1-U2af1
orthologous region to the DS etiology and suggests new modulatory pathways for
learning and memory.

PMCID: PMC2778371
PMID: 19783846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neurochem Res. 2010 Feb;35(2):211-8. doi: 10.1007/s11064-009-0044-3. Epub 2009
Aug 15.

Telomerase deficiency affects normal brain functions in mice.

Lee J(1), Jo YS, Sung YH, Hwang IK, Kim H, Kim SY, Yi SS, Choi JS, Sun W, Seong
JK, Lee HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

Telomerase maintains telomere structures and chromosome stability, and it is
essential for preserving the characteristics of stem and progenitor cells. In the
brain, the hippocampus and the olfactory bulbs are continuously supplied with
neural stem and progenitor cells that are required for adult neurogenesis
throughout the life. Therefore, we examined whether telomerase plays important
roles in maintaining normal brain functions in vivo. Telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT) expression was observed in the hippocampus, the olfactory
bulbs, and the cerebellum, but the telomerase RNA component (TERC) was not
detected in hippocampus and olfactory bulbs. Interestingly, TERT-deficient mice
exhibited significantly altered anxiety-like behaviors and abnormal olfaction
measuring the functions of the hippocampus and the olfactory bulbs, respectively.
However, the cerebellum-dependent behavior was not changed in these mutant mice. 
These results suggest that TERT is constitutively expressed in the hippocampus
and the olfactory bulbs, and that it is important for regulating normal brain
functions.

PMID: 19685288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Acupunct Electrother Res. 2009;34(3-4):175-203.

Temporary anti-cancer & anti-pain effects of mechanical stimulation of any one of
3 front teeth (1st incisor, 2nd incisor, & canine) of right & left side of upper 
& lower jaws and their possible mechanism, & relatively long term disappearance
of pain & cancer parameters by one optimal dose of DHEA, Astragalus, Boswellia
Serrata, often with press needle stimulation of True ST. 36.

Omura Y(1), Horiuchi N, Jones MK, Lu DP, Shimotsuura Y, Duvvi H, Pallos A, Ohki
M, Suetsugu A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Community & Preventive Medicine, New York Medical College, USA.
icaet@yahoo.com

One minute downward pressure on the tip of any one of the front 3 teeth (1st
incisor, 2nd incisor, and canine) at the right and left sides of the upper and
lower jaw by a wooden toothpick induced temporary disappearance (20 min
approximately 4 hours) of abnormally increased pain parameters (pain grading,
Substance P, & TXB2), and cancer parameters (Telomere, Integrin alpha5beta1,
Oncogene C-fos Ab2, etc. of Astrocytoma, Glioblastoma, squamous cell carcinoma of
esophagus, adenocarcinoma of lung, breast cancer, adenocarcinoma of colon,
prostate cancer). The effect included temporary disappearance of headache,
toothache, chest and abdominal pain, and backache, often with improved memory &
concentration. Since these beneficial changes resembled the effects of giving one
optimal dose of DHEA, increase of DHEA was measured. Above mechanical stimulation
of one of these front teeth increased abnormally reduced DHEA levels of less than
10 ng to norm1 100 approximately 130 ng BDORT units and normal cell (NC)
telomeres from markedly reduced values to near normal values, and improved
acetylcholine in the Hippocampus. Large organ representation areas for the
Adrenal gland & Hippocampus may exist at these front teeth. This method can be
used for emergency pain control and can explain the beneficial effect of bruxism 
and tooth brushing, through the increase of DHEA levels and activities of the
Hippocampus by increasing Acetylcholine. Increasing NC telomere to optimally high
level resulted in disappearance of pain and improvement or significant reduction 
of malignant tumor. Repeated daily press needle stimulation of True ST. 36
increased NC telomere 450-700 ng BDORT units. One optimal dose of DHEA increased 
NC telomere 525 ng DBORT units and eliminated the pain and abnormally increased
cancer parameters; effect of one optimal dose lasted 0.5-11 months. One optimal
dose of Boswellia Serrata or Astragalus not only increased NC telomere 650 ng
BDORT units, eliminating pain and cancer parameters, but also reduced the size of
the Astrocytoma grade I by 10-20% and the Glioblastoma by 15-90% in less than 2-6
months in some patients, as long as high NC telomere is maintained.

PMID: 20344885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2008 Feb 13;3(2):e1590. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001590.

Shorter telomeres may mark early risk of dementia: preliminary analysis of 62
participants from the nurses' health study.

Grodstein F(1), van Oijen M, Irizarry MC, Rosas HD, Hyman BT, Growdon JH, De Vivo
I.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. fgrodstein@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Dementia takes decades to develop, and effective prevention will
likely require early intervention. Thus, it is critical to identify biomarkers of
preclinical disease, allowing targeting of high-risk subjects for preventive
efforts. Since telomeres shorten with age and oxidative stress, both of which are
important contributors to the onset of dementia, telomere length might be a
valuable biomarker.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Among 62 participants of the Nurses' Health
Study, we conducted neurologic evaluations, including patient and caregiver
interviews, physical exam, neurologic exam, and neuropsychologic testing. We also
conducted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a sample of 29 of these women. In
these preliminary data, after adjustment for numerous health and lifestyle
factors, we found that truncated telomeres in peripheral blood leukocytes
segregate with preclinical dementia states, including mild cognitive impairment
(MCI); the odds of MCI were 12-fold higher (odds ratio = 12.00, 95% confidence
interval 1.24-116.5) for those with shorter telomere length compared to longer
telomere length. In addition, decreasing telomere length was strongly related to 
decreasing hippocampal volume (p = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary data suggest that telomere length may be a
possible early marker of dementia risk, and merits further study in large,
prospective investigations.

PMCID: PMC2536511
PMID: 18795148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Neurosci. 2008 Sep 10;28(37):9194-204. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3314-07.2008.

Noggin expands neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus.

Bonaguidi MA(1), Peng CY, McGuire T, Falciglia G, Gobeske KT, Czeisler C, Kessler
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University's Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. mbonagu1@jhmi.edu

New neurons are added to the adult hippocampus throughout life and contribute to 
cognitive functions, including learning and memory. It remains unclear whether
ongoing neurogenesis arises from self-renewing neural stem cells (NSCs) or from
multipotential progenitor cells that cannot self-renew in the hippocampus. This
is primarily based on observations that neural precursors derived from the
subventricular zone (SVZ) can be passaged long term, whereas hippocampal
subgranular zone (SGZ) precursors are rapidly depleted by passaging. We
demonstrate here that high levels of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling
occur in hippocampal but not SVZ precursors in vitro, and blocking BMP signaling 
with Noggin is sufficient to foster hippocampal cell self-renewal, proliferation,
and multipotentiality using single-cell clonal analysis. Moreover, NSC
maintenance requires continual Noggin exposure, which implicates BMPs as crucial 
regulators of NSC aging. In vivo, Noggin is expressed in the adult dentate gyrus 
and limits BMP signaling in proliferative cells of the SGZ. Transgenic Noggin
overexpression in the SGZ increases multiple precursor cell populations but
proportionally increases the glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive cell
population at the expense of other precursors, suggesting that Noggin acts on
NSCs in vivo. To confirm this, we used a dual thymidine analog paradigm to
repeatedly label slowly dividing cells over a long duration. We find that small
populations of label-retaining cells exist in the SGZ and that Noggin
overexpression increases their numbers. Thus, we propose that the adult
hippocampus contains a population of NSCs, which can be expanded both in vitro
and in vivo by blocking BMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC3651371
PMID: 18784300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Stem Cells. 2008 Oct;26(10):2654-63. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0285. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

Putative dental pulp-derived stem/stromal cells promote proliferation and
differentiation of endogenous neural cells in the hippocampus of mice.

Huang AH(1), Snyder BR, Cheng PH, Chan AW.

Author information: 
(1)Grace Dental Clinic, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan.

Until now, interest in dental pulp stem/stromal cell (DPSC) research has centered
on mineralization and tooth repair. Beginning a new paradigm in DPSC research, we
grafted undifferentiated, untreated DPSCs into the hippocampus of
immune-suppressed mice. The rhesus DPSC (rDPSC) line used was established from
the dental pulp of rhesus macaques and found to be similar to human bone
marrow/mesenchymal stem cells, which express Nanog, Rex-1, Oct-4, and various
cell surface antigens, and have multipotent differentiation capability.
Implantation of rDPSCs into the hippocampus of mice stimulated proliferation of
endogenous neural cells and resulted in the recruitment of pre-existing Nestin(+)
neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and beta-tubulin-III(+) mature neurons to the site
of the graft. Additionally, many cells born during the first 7 days after
implantation proliferated, forming NPCs and neurons, and, to a lesser extent,
underwent astrogliosis, forming astrocytes and microglia, by 30 days after
implantation. Although the DPSC graft itself was short term, it had long-term
effects by promoting growth factor signaling. Implantation of DPSCs enhanced the 
expression of ciliary neurotrophic factor, vascular endothelial growth factor,
and fibroblast growth factor for up to 30 days after implantation. In conclusion,
grafting rDPSCs promotes proliferation, cell recruitment, and maturation of
endogenous stem/progenitor cells by modulating the local microenvironment. Our
results suggest that DPSCs have a valuable, unique therapeutic potential,
specifically as a stimulator and modulator of the local repair response in the
central nervous system. DPSCs would be a preferable cell source for therapy due
to the possibility of a "personalized" stem cell, avoiding the problems
associated with host immune rejection. Disclosure of potential conflicts of
interest is found at the end of this article.

PMCID: PMC4416417
PMID: 18687995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurochem. 2008 Aug;106(4):1900-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05554.x. Epub
2008 Jul 9.

Negative regulation of neurogenesis and spatial memory by NR2B-containing NMDA
receptors.

Hu M(1), Sun YJ, Zhou QG, Chen L, Hu Y, Luo CX, Wu JY, Xu JS, Li LX, Zhu DY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Disease, Nanjing Medical University, and
Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, 
Nanjing, China.

Several lines of evidence suggest involvement of NMDA receptors (NMDARs) in the
regulation of neurogenesis in adults and the formation of spatial memory.
Functional properties of NMDARs are strongly influenced by the type of NR2
subunits incorporated. In adult forebrain regions such as the hippocampus and
cortex, only NR2A and NR2B subunits are available to form the receptor complex
with NR1 subunit. NR2B is predominant NR2 subunit in any of rat or human neural
stem cells (NSCs). Thus, we suppose that NR2B-containing NMDAR should be critical
in regulating adult neurogenesis, and thereby playing a role in the formation of 
spatial memory. In the cultured NSCs derived from the embryonic brain of rats,
NR2B subunit-specific NMDAR antagonist Ro25-6981 increased cell proliferation,
whereas MK-801, non-selective open-channel blocker of NMDARs, inhibited cell
proliferation. Blockade of NR2B-containing NMDAR stimulated neurogenesis in the
adult hippocampus and facilitated the formation of spatial memory. The enhanced
spatial memory dropped back to base level when the NR2B antagonist-induced
neurogenesis was neutralized by 3'-azido-deoxythymidine, a telomerase inhibitor. 
In addition, blockade of NR2B inhibited neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS)
enzymatic activity. In null mutant mice lacking nNOS gene (nNOS-/-), the effects 
of NR2B antagonist on neurogenesis disappeared. Moreover, nitric oxide donor
DETA/NONOate attenuated and nNOS inhibitor 7-nitroindazole enhanced the effect of
Ro 25-6981 on NSCs proliferation. Our findings suggest that NR2B-containing NMDAR
subtypes negatively regulate neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus by activating 
nNOS activity and thereby hinder the formation of spatial memory.

PMID: 18624924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008 Oct;200(2):231-42. doi:
10.1007/s00213-008-1200-1. Epub 2008 May 30.

DETA/NONOate, a nitric oxide donor, produces antidepressant effects by promoting 
hippocampal neurogenesis.

Hua Y(1), Huang XY, Zhou L, Zhou QG, Hu Y, Luo CX, Li F, Zhu DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, 210029, China.

RATIONALE: Increasing evidence suggests that depression may be associated with a 
lack of hippocampal neurogenesis. Our recent study shows that endogenous nitric
oxide (NO) contributes to chronic mild stress (CMS)-induced depression by
suppressing hippocampal neurogenesis.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of exogenous NO 
in CMS-induced depression in young adult mice.
RESULTS: In normal mice, administration of a pure NO donor
(Z)-1-[N-(2-aminoethyl)-N-(2-ammonioethyl) aminio] diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate
(DETA/NONOate; 0.4 mg/kg, i.p., for 7 days) produced an antidepressant-like
effect and significantly increased hippocampal neurogenesis. The mice exposed to 
CMS exhibited behavioral changes typical of depression and impaired neurogenesis 
in the hippocampus. Treatment with DETA/NONOate (0.4 mg/kg, i.p., for 7 days)
reversed CMS-induced behavioral despair and hippocampal neurogenesis impairment. 
We treated mice with a telomerase inhibitor 3'-azido-deoxythymidine (AZT; 100
mg/kg, i.p., for 14 days) to disrupt neurogenesis. From day 4 to day 11 of AZT
treatment, mice were injected with DETA/NONOate (0.4 mg/kg, i.p., for 7 days).
Disrupting hippocampal neurogenesis blocked the antidepressant effect of
DETA/NONOate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that exogenous NO benefits chronic
stress-induced depression by stimulating hippocampal neurogenesis and may
represent a novel approach for the treatment of depressive disorders.

PMID: 18512047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2008;9(1):2-5. doi: 10.1080/15622970701875601.

When blue turns to grey: do stress and depression accelerate cell aging?

Wolkowitz OM, Epel ES, Mellon S.

PMID: 18273736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mech Ageing Dev. 2008 Apr;129(4):183-90. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2007.12.004. Epub
2008 Feb 1.

Telomere length in white blood cells, buccal cells and brain tissue and its
variation with ageing and Alzheimer's disease.

Thomas P(1), O' Callaghan NJ, Fenech M.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Human Nutrition, Adelaide BC, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
philip.thomas@csiro.au

Changes in telomere length have been associated with ageing and with certain
age-related degenerative diseases. We report results using a quantitative RTm-PCR
method to measure absolute telomere length (in kb per diploid genome) and show
the age-related changes in white blood cells and buccal cell telomere length (in 
kb per diploid genome) in normal healthy individuals and Alzheimer's patients. We
observed a significantly lower telomere length in white blood cells (P < 0.0001) 
and buccal cells (P < 0.01) in Alzheimer's patients relative to healthy
age-matched controls (31.4% and 32.3%, respectively). However, there was a
significantly greater telomere length in hippocampus cells of Alzheimer's brains 
(P = 0.01) compared to control samples (49.0%). We also observed that telomere
length in buccal cells was 52.2-74.2% shorter than that observed in white blood
cells (P < 0.0001). The odd's ratio of being diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease
(AD) was 10.8 (95% CI 1.19-97.85) if white blood cell telomere length was less
than 115 kb per diploid genome with a specificity of 46% and sensitivity of
92.9%. The odds ratio for AD diagnosis was 4.6 (95% CI 1.22-17.16) if buccal cell
telomere length was less than 40 kb per diploid genome with a sensitivity of
72.7% and a specificity of 63.1%. These results suggest important differences in 
telomere maintenance in Alzheimer's cases compared to healthy controls depending 
on sampled tissue. These results need to be replicated in larger studies and in
cohorts of other neurodegenerative disorders to determine specificity of changes 
to Alzheimer's patients.

PMID: 18242664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Genome Biol. 2007;8(11):R234.

Gene expression atlas of the mouse central nervous system: impact and
interactions of age, energy intake and gender.

Xu X(1), Zhan M, Duan W, Prabhu V, Brenneman R, Wood W, Firman J, Li H, Zhang P, 
Ibe C, Zonderman AB, Longo DL, Poosala S, Becker KG, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research
Program, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. xuxi@grc.nia.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: The structural and functional complexity of the mammalian central
nervous system (CNS) is organized and modified by complicated molecular signaling
processes that are poorly understood.
RESULTS: We measured transcripts of 16,896 genes in 5 CNS regions from cohorts of
young, middle-aged and old male and female mice that had been maintained on
either a control diet or a low energy diet known to retard aging. Each CNS region
(cerebral cortex, hippocampus, striatum, cerebellum and spinal cord) possessed
its own unique transcriptome fingerprint that was independent of age, gender and 
energy intake. Less than 10% of genes were significantly affected by age, diet or
gender, with most of these changes occurring between middle and old age. The
transcriptome of the spinal cord was the most responsive to age, diet and gender,
while the striatal transcriptome was the least responsive. Gender and energy
restriction had particularly robust influences on the hippocampal transcriptome
of middle-aged mice. Prominent functional groups of age- and energy-sensitive
genes were those encoding proteins involved in DNA damage responses (Werner and
telomere-associated proteins), mitochondrial and proteasome functions, cell fate 
determination (Wnt and Notch signaling) and synaptic vesicle trafficking.
CONCLUSION: Mouse CNS transcriptomes responded to age, energy intake and gender
in a regionally distinctive manner. The systematic transcriptome dataset also
provides a window into mechanisms of age-, diet- and sex-related CNS plasticity
and vulnerability.

PMCID: PMC2258177
PMID: 17988385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 20;104(12):5163-8. Epub 2007 Mar 2.

Evolving the lock to fit the key to create a family of G protein-coupled
receptors potently activated by an inert ligand.

Armbruster BN(1), Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, Roth BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 20;104(12):4777-8.

We evolved muscarinic receptors in yeast to generate a family of G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that are activated solely by a
pharmacologically inert drug-like and bioavailable compound (clozapine-N-oxide). 
Subsequent screening in human cell lines facilitated the creation of a family of 
muscarinic acetylcholine GPCRs suitable for in vitro and in situ studies. We
subsequently created lines of telomerase-immortalized human pulmonary artery
smooth muscle cells stably expressing all five family members and found that each
one faithfully recapitulated the signaling phenotype of the parent receptor. We
also expressed a G(i)-coupled designer receptor in hippocampal neurons (hM(4)D)
and demonstrated its ability to induce membrane hyperpolarization and neuronal
silencing. We have thus devised a facile approach for designing families of GPCRs
with engineered ligand specificities. Such reverse-engineered GPCRs will prove to
be powerful tools for selectively modulating signal-transduction pathways in
vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1829280
PMID: 17360345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Neurochem. 2006 Jul;98(2):629-40. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

Mesodermal cell types induce neurogenesis from adult human hippocampal progenitor
cells.

Hermann A(1), Maisel M, Liebau S, Gerlach M, Kleger A, Schwarz J, Kim KS,
Antoniadis G, Lerche H, Storch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Neurogenesis in the adult human brain occurs within two principle neurogenic
regions, the hippocampus and the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral
ventricles. Recent reports demonstrated the isolation of human neuroprogenitor
cells (NPCs) from these regions, but due to limited tissue availability the
knowledge of their phenotype and differentiation behavior is restricted. Here we 
characterize the phenotype and differentiation capacity of human adult
hippocampal NPCs (hNPCs), derived from patients who underwent epilepsy surgery,
on various feeder cells including fetal mixed cortical cultures, mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts (MEFs) and PA6 stromal cells. Isolated hNPCs were cultured in clonal 
density by transferring the cells to serum-free media supplemented with FGF-2 and
EGF in 3% atmospheric oxygen. These hNPCs showed neurosphere formation, expressed
high levels of early neuroectodermal markers, such as the proneural genes NeuroD1
and Olig2, the NSC markers Nestin and Musashi1, the proliferation marker Ki67 and
significant activity of telomerase. The phenotype was CD15low/-, CD34-, CD45- and
CD133-. After removal of mitogens and plating them on poly D-lysine, they
spontaneously differentiated into a neuronal (MAP2ab+), astroglial (GFAP+), and
oligodendroglial (GalC+) phenotype. Differentiated hNPCs showed functional
properties of neurons, such as sodium channels, action potentials and production 
of the neurotransmitters glutamate and GABA. Co-culture of hNPCs with fetal
cortical cultures, MEFs and PA6 cells increased neurogenesis of hNPCs in vitro,
while only MEFs and PA6 cells also led to a morphological and functional
neurogenic maturation. Together we provide a first detailed characterization of
the phenotype and differentiation potential of human adult hNPCs in vitro. Our
findings reinforce the emerging view that the differentiation capacity of adult
hNPCs is critically influenced by non-neuronal mesodermal feeder cells.

PMID: 16771838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Neurochem. 2006 Apr;97(2):567-81. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

TRF2 dysfunction elicits DNA damage responses associated with senescence in
proliferating neural cells and differentiation of neurons.

Zhang P(1), Furukawa K, Opresko PL, Xu X, Bohr VA, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research
Program, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Telomeres are specialized structures at the ends of chromosomes that consist of
tandem repeats of the DNA sequence TTAGGG and several proteins that protect the
DNA and regulate the plasticity of the telomeres. The telomere-associated protein
TRF2 (telomeric repeat binding factor 2) is critical for the control of telomere 
structure and function; TRF2 dysfunction results in the exposure of the telomere 
ends and activation of ATM (ataxia telangiectasin mutated)-mediated DNA damage
response. Recent findings suggest that telomere attrition can cause senescence or
apoptosis of mitotic cells, but the function of telomeres in differentiated
neurons is unknown. Here, we examined the impact of telomere dysfunction via TRF2
inhibition in neurons (primary embryonic hippocampal neurons) and mitotic neural 
cells (astrocytes and neuroblastoma cells). We demonstrate that telomere
dysfunction induced by adenovirus-mediated expression of dominant-negative TRF2
(DN-TRF2) triggers a DNA damage response involving the formation of nuclear foci 
containing phosphorylated histone H2AX and activated ATM in each cell type. In
mitotic neural cells DN-TRF2 induced activation of both p53 and p21 and
senescence (as indicated by an up-regulation of beta-galactosidase). In contrast,
in neurons DN-TRF2 increased p21, but neither p53 nor beta-galactosidase was
induced. In addition, TRF2 inhibition enhanced the morphological, molecular and
biophysical differentiation of hippocampal neurons. These findings demonstrate
divergent molecular and physiological responses to telomere dysfunction in
mitotic neural cells and neurons, indicate a role for TRF2 in regulating neuronal
differentiation, and suggest a potential therapeutic application of inhibition of
TRF2 function in the treatment of neural tumors.

PMID: 16539655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Med Genet. 2005 Apr;42(4):299-306.

Disruption of the gene Euchromatin Histone Methyl Transferase1 (Eu-HMTase1) is
associated with the 9q34 subtelomeric deletion syndrome.

Kleefstra T(1), Smidt M, Banning MJ, Oudakker AR, Van Esch H, de Brouwer AP,
Nillesen W, Sistermans EA, Hamel BC, de Bruijn D, Fryns JP, Yntema HG, Brunner
HG, de Vries BB, van Bokhoven H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre St Radboud, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: A new syndrome has been recognised following thorough analysis of
patients with a terminal submicroscopic subtelomeric deletion of chromosome 9q.
These have in common severe mental retardation, hypotonia, brachycephaly, flat
face with hypertelorism, synophrys, anteverted nares, thickened lower lip, carp
mouth with macroglossia, and conotruncal heart defects. The minimum critical
region responsible for this 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome (9q-) is
approximately 1.2 Mb and encompasses at least 14 genes.
OBJECTIVE: To characterise the breakpoints of a de novo balanced translocation
t(X;9)(p11.23;q34.3) in a mentally retarded female patient with clinical features
similar to the 9q- syndrome.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the break points showed that the translocation was 
fully balanced and only one gene on chromosome 9 was disrupted--Euchromatin
Histone Methyl Transferase1 (Eu-HMTase1)--encoding a histone H3 lysine 9
methyltransferase (H3-K9 HMTase). This indicates that haploinsufficiency of
Eu-HMTase1 is responsible for the 9q submicroscopic subtelomeric deletion
syndrome. This observation was further supported by the spatio-temporal
expression of the gene. Using tissue in situ hybridisation studies in mouse
embryos and adult brain, Eu-HMTase1 was shown to be expressed in the developing
nervous system and in specific peripheral tissues. While expression is
selectively downregulated in adult brain, substantial expression is retained in
the olfactory bulb, anterior/ventral lateral ventricular wall, and hippocampus
and weakly in the piriform cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression pattern of this gene suggests a role in the CNS
development and function, which is in line with the severe mental retardation and
behaviour problems in patients who lack one copy of the gene.

PMCID: PMC1736026
PMID: 15805155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurochem. 2004 Feb;88(4):1026-39.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate induces proliferation and morphological changes of neural
progenitor cells.

Harada J(1), Foley M, Moskowitz MA, Waeber C.

Author information: 
(1)Stroke and Neurovascular Regulation Laboratory, Department of Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a lipid mediator that exerts multiple cellular
functions through activation of G-protein-coupled receptors. Although the role of
S1P on angiogenesis is well established, its role in neurogenesis is unknown. We 
examined the effects of S1P on G-protein activation in brain sections of rat
embryo and on neural progenitor cells in culture. Intense S1P-stimulated
[35S]GTPgammaS labeling was observed as early as E15 in the neuroepithelium and
differentiating fields throughout the brain, suggesting that functional S1P
receptors are expressed in brain areas with active neurogenesis. mRNA transcripts
for several S1P receptor subtypes (S1P1, S1P2, S1P3 and S1P5) were expressed in
neural progenitor cells prepared from embryonic rat hippocampus. S1P induced
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and proliferation 
of neural progenitor cells as determined by BrdU incorporation in a pertussis
toxin-sensitive manner. These effects were prevented by the ERK signaling
inhibitor U0126. S1P augmented telomerase activity in neural progenitor cells
with similar potency as that of FGF-2. Furthermore, S1P induced cell-cell
aggregation. This morphological change was transient and prevented by Y-27632, an
inhibitor of Rho-associated kinase. These results suggest that S1P plays a
pleiotropic role in neurogenesis via pathways involving S1P receptors, MAP
kinases and Rho kinase.

PMID: 14756825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Neurosci. 2003 Mar-Aug;25(2-4):257-72.

Distinguishing features of progenitor cells in the late embryonic and adult
hippocampus.

Limke TL(1), Cai J, Miura T, Rao MS, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Aging, Laboratory of Neurosciences, Gerontology Research
Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. limketo@grc.nia.nih.gov

Adult neurogenesis occurs within the subgranular layer of the hippocampal dentate
gyrus. In this study, we examined dividing cells in the late embryonic and adult 
rat hippocampus to identify distinguishing characteristics and potential neural
stem cell population(s), as identified by the putative neural stem cell markers
FGFR4 and Sox1. In embryonic hippocampal cells in primary culture, basic
fibroblast factor caused cell proliferation, increased telomerase activity and
upregulation of FGFR4 mRNA. In both the embryonic and adult brains, proliferating
cells express Sox1, as well as markers for neuronal- and glial-restricted
precursors. However, the cell markers associated with cells expressing
proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and Sox1 differed between late
embryonic and adult hippocampus, suggesting that there are important differences 
between adult and embryonic neurogenesis.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12966222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 May 1;12(9):975-84.

Spontaneous deletion of epilepsy gene orthologs in a mutant mouse with a low
electroconvulsive threshold.

Yang Y(1), Beyer BJ, Otto JF, O'Brien TP, Letts VA, White HS, Frankel WN.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

The electroconvulsive threshold (ECT) test has been used extensively to determine
the protection conferred by antiepileptic drug candidates against induced
seizures in rodents. Despite its clinical relevance, the potential of ECT to
identify mouse epilepsy models in genetic studies has not been thoroughly
assessed. We adopted the ECT test to screen the progeny of ethylnitrosourea
treated male C57BL/6J mice. In a small-scale screen, several mutant lines
conferring a low threshold to ECT minimal clonic seizures were mapped to the
telomeric region of mouse chromosome 2 in independent founder families. This high
incidence was suggestive of a single spontaneous event that pre-existed in the
founders of mutagenized stock. Genetic and physical mapping led to the discovery 
that several lines shared a single mutation, Szt1 (seizure threshold-1),
consisting of a 300 kb deletion of genomic DNA involving three known genes. Two
of these genes, Kcnq2 and Chrna4, are known to be mutated in human epilepsy
families. Szt1 homozygotes and heterozygotes display similar phenotypes to those 
found in the respective Kcnq2 knockout mutant mice, suggesting that Kcnq2
haploinsufficiency is at the root of the Szt1 seizure sensitivity. Our results
provide a novel genetic model for epilepsy research and demonstrate that the
approach of using ECT to study seizures in mice has the potential to lead to the 
identification of human epilepsy susceptibility genes.

PMID: 12700166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Exp Neurol. 2002 Dec;178(2):294-300.

Seizures and tissue injury induce telomerase in hippocampal microglial cells.

Fu W(1), Lee J, Guo Z, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Gerontology Research 
Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Telomerase is a reverse transcriptase that adds repeats of a six-base DNA
sequence to chromosome ends and thereby prevents their shortening during
successive cell divisions. Telomerase activity and expression of the catalytic
subunit of telomerase (TERT) are high in brain cells during embryonic
development, but are undetectable in the adult. We now report that telomerase
activity and expression of TERT are induced in the hippocampus of adult mice
after administration of the seizure-inducing excitotoxin kainate. Telomerase
activity is present at 24 h and 7 days after kainate administration, but is no
longer detectable at 4 weeks. Because the time course of telomerase induction was
similar to the time course of microglial activation, we performed studies to
determine whether microglia were the source of the telomerase activity.
Examination of brain sections immunostained with a TERT antibody and an antibody 
against a microglia-specific antigen revealed that TERT was not detectable in the
uninjured brain, and was present in microglia 24 h and 7 days after kainate
administration. This is the first evidence that telomerase can be induced by
brain injury and the first evidence that TERT can be expressed in microglia,
suggesting roles for telomerase in microglial responses to brain injury.

PMID: 12504888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Neurosci. 2002 Dec 15;22(24):10710-9.

Telomerase mediates the cell survival-promoting actions of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor and secreted amyloid precursor protein in developing
hippocampal neurons.

Fu W(1), Lu C, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Gerontology Research 
Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Telomerase, a reverse transcriptase that maintains chromosome ends (telomeres)
during successive cell divisions in mitotic cells is present in neuroblasts and
early postmitotic embryonic neurons but is absent from adult neurons. The signals
that control telomerase levels during development are unknown, as are the
functions of telomerase in developing neurons. We now report that telomerase
activity and levels of its catalytic subunit telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) are increased in embryonic hippocampal neurons by brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and a secreted form of beta-amyloid precursor protein 
(sAPP). BDNF and sAPP promote the survival of the embryonic neurons, and these
trophic effects are blocked when TERT production is suppressed using antisense
technology. Telomerase is required for the long-term survival of early
postmitotic neurons during a time window of approximately 1 week in culture;
telomerase is then downregulated and is not required for BDNF and sAPP survival
signaling in mature neurons. The increase in telomerase activity and trophic
effects of BDNF and sAPP are mediated by phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and
p42/p44 MAP kinases. Our findings demonstrate a requirement for telomerase in the
cell survival-promoting actions of BDNF and sAPP in early postmitotic hippocampal
neurons, suggesting a previously unknown role for telomerase in mediating the
biological actions of neurotrophic factors during brain development.

PMID: 12486164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2001 Nov 26;131(1-2):167-71.

Telomerase protects developing neurons against DNA damage-induced cell death.

Lu C(1), Fu W, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Gerontology Research 
Center, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

In mitotic cells, telomerase adds repeats of a DNA sequence (TTAGGG) to the ends 
of chromosomes (telomeres) thereby maintaining their length and preventing
cellular senescence. We recently reported that the catalytic subunit of
telomerase (TERT) is expressed in neuronal progenitor cells and in early
postmitotic neurons in the developing rodent brain. We now report that TERT can
protect cultured PC12 cells and embryonic hippocampal neurons against death
induced by DNA damage. Overexpression of TERT in PC12 cells increases their
resistance to the topoisomerase inhibitors camptothecin and etoposide.
Hippocampal neurons in which TERT levels are decreased using antisense technology
exhibit increased vulnerability to the DNA-damaging agents. Emerging findings
suggest that DNA damage may trigger the death of neurons during brain development
and in neurodegenerative disorders. Our data therefore suggest roles for TERT in 
modulating such cell deaths.

PMID: 11718848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Neurosci Res. 2001 May 1;64(3):252-60.

Differential regulation of telomerase activity and TERT expression during brain
development in mice.

Klapper W(1), Shin T, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Gerontology Research 
Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Telomerase is an enzyme activity consisting of a reverse transcriptase called
TERT and an RNA component that adds repeats of a DNA sequence (TTAGGG) to the
ends of chromosomes, thereby preventing their shortening. Associations between
telomerase activity and proliferation and differentiation of neural tumor cells
and neural stem cells have been reported, but the role of telomerase in brain
development is unknown. We now report analyses of telomerase activity, TERT mRNA 
levels and levels of mRNAs encoding the telomere-associated proteins TRF1 and
TRF2 in three different brain regions (brainstem, hippocampus and cerebral
cortex) and the eye of mice at increasing developmental time points. Telomerase
activity is high in the brain at embryonic day 13 (E13), declines markedly
between E13 and E18, remains at a low level until postnatal day 3 (P3) and
becomes undetectable by P10. Surprisingly, the temporal pattern of change in
telomerase activity is not paralleled by a decrease in levels of TERT mRNA that
remain elevated from E13 to P5 (with fluctuations during this time window that
vary among brain regions), and then decrease to a lower level that is maintained 
into adulthood. TRF1 and TRF2 mRNA levels are relatively constant throughout
brain development. Our data are consistent with a role for telomerase activity in
proliferation of neural progenitor cells, and further suggest that TERT may play 
roles in neuronal differentiation and survival. The dissociation between TERT
expression and telomerase activity is a novel finding that suggests biological
functions for TERT in addition to telomere maintenance. J. Neurosci. Res.
64:252-260, 2001. Published 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11319769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Neurochem. 2000 Jul;75(1):117-24.

The catalytic subunit of telomerase protects neurons against amyloid
beta-peptide-induced apoptosis.

Zhu H(1), Fu W, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Sanders-Brown Research Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky. Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

The catalytic subunit of telomerase (TERT) is a specialized reverse transcriptase
that has been associated with cell immortalization and cancer. It was reported
recently that TERT is expressed in neurons throughout the brain in embryonic and 
early postnatal development, but is absent from neurons in the adult brain. We
now report that suppression of TERT levels and function in embryonic mouse
hippocampal neurons in culture using antisense technology and the telomerase
inhibitor 3' -azido-2' 3' -dideoxythymidine significantly increases their
vulnerability to cell death induced by amyloid beta-peptide, a neurotoxic protein
believed to promote neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer's disease. Neurons in
which TERT levels were reduced exhibited increased levels of oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction following exposure to amyloid beta-peptide.
Overexpression of TERT in pheochromocytoma cells resulted in decreased
vulnerability to amyloid beta-peptide-induced apoptosis. Our findings demonstrate
a neuroprotective function of TERT in an experimental model relevant to
Alzheimer's disease, and suggest the possibility that restoration of TERT
expression in neurons in the adult brain may protect against age-related
neurodegeneration.

PMID: 10854254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]